Now that we know how to use try and catch to look for exceptions in our code we're going to go back
over to Android studio and create a new application which will download content from the web.
Now this is a really powerful thing to be able to do because it's the beginnings of connecting our apps
to online services such as Google Maps Twitter Facebook any publicly available service that we can work
into our apps to add power and great features beyond what we could just code ourselves.
So it's a really cool thing to be able to do and it will show us a number of new ways to work with Android
apps as well.
By the end of this lecture you'll know a lot more about threads and how to use a different application
thread to have two threads going at once.
All right.
So let's do it.
We'll call it downloading web content and we'll use all the usual settings blank activity.
And here we are.
So we're going to ignore the layout completely and all of our code here is going to be in the main activity
our java file.
All right.
So just to be really clear what we're trying to do here let's look for example at a great Web site.
If you haven't worked with web sites before you might not know that behind every Web site is some DML
code and you can get that by right clicking or control clicking in your browser and going to something
like view page source and then that will show you the actual H-G AML code which is behind that web page.
So there's a lot of code that makes up this particular web page and that's what we're going to try and
download.
And we're just going to put it in the console for the moment.
So all our aim is is to get this content and put it in the console.
That's not particularly useful but if we use it in conjunction with what is known as API or application
programming interfaces which allow you to download useful information and then process it and give it
to the user in exciting ways then that is extremely powerful.
So that's kind of the first step onto being able to do a whole bunch of exciting things with your apps
or read them.
There are quite a few steps to this or when Year in advance but you are going to learn a lot of stuff
about Android as we go and we're going to start off by creating a new class
so we're going to use public class to create our class.
I remember a class.
Nothing to be scared of is just a collection of methods and variables that we can use in our app and
really although what we're creating here is a class.
It's basically just a method.
So to be using it just to run the process of downloading some web content.
So I'm going to call it download task.
It's a task because we're doing something and I've used a capital D that because classes normally start
the first word with a capital letter unlike variables.
Now this class is going to be a special class which is going to extend another class called async task.
There it is.
Now before I lose you don't worry about async task.
All it is is a way of running your code on a different thread to the thread that we're used to.
So we run most of our code so far in the uncreate method.
This is known as the main thread or the UI thread.
Now it's advised by Google and it's generally a very good idea to run any code which could take a fair
bit of time on a different thread to the main thread.
Now that's simply for the reason that we don't want to delay the running of the UI thread because that's
the bit that displays the app itself to the user.
So really what we're doing here is just creating some code that will be run in the background.
That's what async task allows us to do.
Now I think task takes three variables.
The first is usually of a type string.
The second I'm going to call void.
And the third again is usually of a type string.
Now these three do very different things.
So this first one is the type of variable that we're going to send to this class to instruct it what
to do.
So as you might anticipate we're going to send a u r l a particular location which in this case is going
to be this string here.
CBS dot either way posting Ducrot UK.
So this is the type of data that we want to send to our download task.
This middle tribute is the name of the method that we may or may not use to show the progress of this
task.
So if we were downloading a big file for example that we knew was going to take five or ten minutes
we might have a separate method which shows on a progress bar.
How far along that is and that's where we would put the name of that particular method.
But we're not going to do that here.
So we're just going to void.
And finally this third variable type is the type of variable that's going to be returned by the download
task force.
And actually we don't need this.
We're going to return the well content has a string.
All right.
Hopefully that makes sense.
If not feel free to go back and have another listen to that and also feel free to google izing task
get some more information about it as a load of stuff that you can do with it.
I'm just giving you the information that you need right now if you're curious.
Feel free to post the video and go and find out more.
Now you can see we've got some red underlining there that's just because we're not using yet a critical
method in this task.
So I just tapped on the light bulb and selected implement methods and that's going to implement the
default method that we need.
Which is this one here.
It's actually implemented outside of our class.
I'm just going to pop it back in.
There we go.
So now we've lost that area.
So now we've got some more weirdness.
We've got this do in background protected string and a string dot dot dot.
Don't worry I'm going to talk you through that.
And that is I think the last bit of major weirdness in this lecture.
So don't panic too much.
So this protected key word here is a bit like public but it means that this string can be accessed from
anywhere in the package not just this class and not even just this java file it can be accessed anywhere
in the package.
So basically any way in your app.
And that's because this do in background bearable is a built in part of async task which is this back
up thread that I was talking about which again can be accessed anywhere in your app.
So that's all the protected means.
And and now we've got this last bit of strangeness the string dot dot dot.
Now that's known as var OGs and it's a relatively new variable type in Java.
Now you can more or less think of it as an array.
It's very very similar to an array in that this will contain a bunch of strings.
We have sent to this download task.
Why don't we just use an array.
I hear you ask.
Well mostly because doing background forces us to use Vohra dogs but it is reasonably useful.
I'll show you how.
So now that we've created our download task obviously it doesn't really do anything yet but we can call
it from our own create method as usual and we do something like this will create a new variable of type
download task and we'll call it task and it's going to be a new download task
then we're going to take our task and execute it.
And because we said that we wanted to send some strings into it let's do that.
So the string that we wanted to send to our
download task was this one.
So if we run this we will in a minute with a couple of slight tweaks but if we run this we would be
sending the string everywhere eco representing the UK to the download task would be stored as an array
called paradigms.
Now as I mentioned it's not quite an array it's a Ogg's but that just works differently because it allows
us to do something like this.
So let's say I wanted to download to you our L's so you can get this thing and stack overflow dot com
for example.
So the difference to an array because this wouldn't quite work in if the parameter variable was an array.
I would have to create it as an array like that which wouldn't work here.
So really it's an it's a way of being able to add as many parameters as we like in how cool to the task
without having to specify at this point how many there are.
But other than that you really can think of our dogs as just like an array.
Again I don't want to go into that in too much detail.
Now if you want to learn more about frogs have a quick google.
V I R G S.
But for now I'm going to focus on this.
So before we actually create the code to download the Web site let's just see how this all fits together
and just run this to display this variable in the logs.
So if I want to access this variable here I would
something like log dot I
you r l and then primes zero.
There we go.
So just like an array I would take the zeroth member of the array of strings that has been sent and
then I did say up here that this was going to return a string.
So I'll just return done for now.
And then how do we get the value that's written down here.
What we do
is we create a string that I'll call result said he called to task don't execute and then we add don't
get on the end.
So this then gets the result of this task and puts it in the variable result we get to then see the
result.
So let's just log it
that we get.
And you can see we've got another error here.
If we just have a look and see where that is haha.
We need to surround it with try and catch.
So this is because we're calling a task within async task.
And whenever you do that you have to use try and catch.
And in fact it's given us two different catches the interrupted exception and the execution exception.
So this is because it's happening on a different thread.
So we have to keep track of the fact that it could go wrong.
I'm just going to give that a little bit more space.
You can see we've got those two types of exception there.
And we've also got this method that we haven't seen before print stack trace.
So that's a method that's just very useful it prints all the information that we might want about the
error that occurred or the exception that occurred.
So it's a good way to send an error to your logs.
Right.
So a lot of new stuff there but hopefully that mostly makes sense.
Let's just run that and we should then get the R L printed in the console and then the string that's
returned from that class also printed in the can so on the results there.
So what we have so far is really just a kind of default async task set up which doesn't really do anything
interesting but it does run some code in the background thread.
So if ever you need to do that then this is your kind of structure for setting that up.
And here we.
I just go back up there you can see we've got two important lines difficult to find a little bit inside
the rest of everything.
But there they are.
So there's our u r l TPSAC K repasting And there's our result done.
All right.
So nothing on the surface of it particularly novel that but we have done something pretty critical and
that is we've run a task on the background thread within async task.
So generally a very powerful thing today.
Specifically a very important thing to do if we're going to be doing something that runs for potentially
quite a long time like dühring downloading some content from the web.
All right.
So now finally we're in a position to write our code to download this web content if we get them.
We're going to start by creating a string called result which is going to be where we store the actual
HDMI content of eco reposting to the UK then we're going to create a u r l variable called u r l which
initially is going to be empty.
And a u r l is a little bit different to a string even though it is basically a string.
It has to be in the right format to be able to make it a u r l and it needs to have a variable type
of u r l to allow us to use it as a u r l.
And finally while we're creating variables we need a variable of type h t t p u r l connection and we'll
call it u r l connection.
And initially it's going to be null.
So just empty you can think of p u r l connection as being a bit like a browser.
So we're kind of opening up a browser here and we're going to use it to fetch the contents of a u r
l that's more or less what's going on.
And now we're going to do a couple of things which could result in errors.
So we're going to surround this with our try and catch.
And I'm just going to have a general exception a as my catch.
And then if we do get an exception I'm going to print the stack trace which of course just gives the
details of the exception.
So the first thing that we're going to do which could possibly result in an era is again to try and
convert the string that we've passed to the do in background method as a u r l.
So we're going to take you around and create a new U R L and we're going to do that from the variables
that was passed to the different background method.
Now this is previous so called parens which is a little bit vague so I'm going to call it.
You are Elle's.
So we know that this is only ever going to contain one.
U r l it could possibly contain more.
So just to make it clear that this is not quite an array.
Remember it's a Vargus but we can think of it as an array.
And so I'm going to call you or else because it could contain many different you or else but we obviously
only interested in the first one.
So we're going to create you ourselves.
Zero right.
So this could possibly give us an era or an exception if this was malformed for example.
So if I just sent it like that then we'd get an exception because that's not a valid you are el.
But we can rely on our code so we're very unlikely to get this exception.
But we've got it there just in case we do.
All right.
So now that we've got you are all set up we're going to set up our u r l connection which is a bit like
opening our browser window and we do this from you r l and then within our YOU Arel we open a connection.
Now that doesn't have a type of HTP connection so we need to cast it as an h t t p u r l connection
so that it matches up with the type that we created a real connection with him.
So now we've effectively opened the browser window and started to attempt the load of u r l.
Now we need to actually do that load and we do that using an input stream
and we normally call that input stream in have the necessary code for that and we get that from our
connection at get input stream.
So you can imagine what that is.
This is just a stream to hold the input of data as it comes in.
We then need to be able to read that data.
So we're going to create an input stream reader which I'm just going to go read up like that.
And that's going to be a new input stream Rita and we're going to create it with our input stream which
is in so we're kind of building up our system to read the contents of that you are l and we actually
do that one character at a time.
So we're going to create a variable called data which is going to be equal to a reader dot red which
will keep track of the location through the DML content that we're currently on.
So we're going to have a WHILE loop which will keep on going as long as data is not equal t minus 1
and that's slightly weird but what happens is data will count three so 0 1 2 3 4 5 etc. then just keep
on going while it's reading characters through the contents of the U R L and it will keep going.
And then once it gets to the end it will have a value of minus one.
So that's why we can use this wildly to read our data.
Then we're going to create a char character which will call current because it's the current character
that's being read from the file and that's getting to be equal to data.
But
because data is an integer we want to cast that as a character that will essentially get whatever the
current character is that's being downloaded from the stream from the RL.
Then almost finally we're going to append that to result
like that.
So what we're essentially doing is we're continually reading characters from the input stream reader
and adding them to results.
Results are going to end up being a big string containing all of the characters of the HVM all of that
site.
Finally we tell data to move on to the next character.
So like that.
So this just means data is going to keep on going and looping through all the characters in this stream.
So in the contents of the RL until it gets to the last one at which point it will have a value of minus
one and it will be finished.
And believe it or not we're now there.
So what we can do is return
results.
So that means the result of this is we're turned back to the original task and then we can print it
out here.
So I'll just change the label to have contents of you Arel and then I'm going to get rid of this returned
done.
Actually that might well cause problems where it is because
and I'm just going to pop in I return
failed to catch this exception so if we go back here then we could do a check to see if results equals
failed then do something show the user that this failed but we didn't need to do that this time because
we're just checking the logs anyway.
All right.
There was one more thing that we need to do before we run out and that is we have to request permission
to use the internet connection because that's a special privilege that the user may deny us and we do
that over in manifests and then in the Android manifest file.
So we haven't really looked in here before.
But if you've done any iOS development this is very similar to the info Doppie list file.
Essentially it contains a bunch of information about your app like the name of the app and a few other
pieces.
And it's also the place where you ask for specific permissions.
So if you were to ask for permission than you normally do up here just before the application section
there.
And we do it like this.
So we have it uses dash permission and then the name of the permission is Android Daut permission dot
Let's get that right.
Internet and then we close that tag like that.
So you have to obviously get that exactly right.
And then this will pop up if your app ever makes it into Google Play.
Then this will pop up in Google Play and it will show the user that this app is going to use their internet
connection.
So generally it's a good idea to show the user that you have a good reason for using their internet
connection rather than just putting that permission in that right.
So fingers crossed
let's see what we get.
OK there we go you might just be able to make out that.
Here is the full contents of the web posting to current UK fantastic.
All right.
And so that's it.
You may feel that we've got to work harder than you expected to get this built but we've done a lot
of really quite complex stuff that we've learned about this try and catch set up.
And we've learned how to use this quite complicated async task idea to run a task in the background.
Fortunately it's all been well worth it because we're now able to do something really powerful namely
grab content from anywhere on the Web.
We're now going to take that a step further and see how to download images and display them directly
in our apps.